74 Cancer January 1, 2021
Original Article
“This Is Some Mess Right Here”: Exploring Interactions Between
Black Sexual Minority Women and Health Care Providers for
Breast Cancer Screening and Care
Naomi Greene, MPH 1
; Jowanna Malone, MSc2
; Mary Anne Adams, MSW3
; Lorraine T. Dean, ScD2,4; and
Tonia Poteat, PhD2,5
BACKGROUND: Few studies have explored how the intersection of race and sexual identity contribute to breast cancer disparities for
Black sexual minority women (SMW). Issues within patient-provider relationships, including bias, contribute to health disparities for
minority groups. The authors used constructs from self-determination theory (SDT) to explore the nature of health care provider interactions in breast cancer screening and care among Black SMW. METHODS: Participants were sampled nationally through social media,
targeted emails, and referrals. Qualitative, in-depth interviews were conducted with 15 Black cisgender SMW, ages 38 to 64 years, who
had a breast cancer diagnosis or recent abnormal mammogram. Interviews were conducted face-to-face or online, audio-recorded,
and transcribed verbatim. Two analysts coded the interviews. Codes were analyzed across interviews to identify themes salient to SDT.
RESULTS: Themes aligned with the SDT constructs of relatedness and autonomy. Some participants discussed feeling most understood
by Black and/or female providers who shared at least 1 of their identities. Feeling understood through shared identity contributed to
participants feeling seen and heard by their providers. Participants who discussed negative experiences with providers believed that
the provider made negative assumptions about them based on their race and/or sexual orientation. CONCLUSIONS: When interacting
with health care providers for breast cancer screening and care, Black SMW face specific challenges related to their multiply marginalized social position. Reducing health care provider bias toward Black SMW may improve patients’ desires to continue in care. Providing
equitable care while acknowledging and respecting women with multiply marginalized identities may improve the nature of these interactions. Cancer 2021;127:74-81. © 2020 American Cancer Society.
KEYWORDS: African Americans, breast neoplasms, early detection of cancer, female, personal autonomy, physician-patient relations,
sexual and gender minorities.
INTRODUCTION
Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in women.1
 Disparities in breast cancer screening risk and mortality
have been found in studies of sexual minority women (SMW) and studies of Black cisgender women (ie, women assigned
female at birth).2-5 SMW have a higher prevalence of breast cancer risk factors than other women, including nulliparity,
alcohol consumption, smoking, and obesity.6
 Despite this higher risk, SMW have a lower lifetime prevalence of screening
mammograms compared with heterosexual women7
 and have less timely screening7-11 because of negative beliefs about
care, lower perceived severity, lack of health insurance, costs of care, and perceptions of heterosexism and homophobia
among providers.8-11 We found no studies that examined whether or how these barriers may affect follow-up after abnormal screening. The small numbers of racial/ethnic minority participants in prior studies limit the ability to assess whether
barriers to screening and follow-up for sexual minorities apply across racial groups.4
Black women are diagnosed at later stages of breast cancer than White women because of lower frequency of mammograms, longer time between mammograms, and lack of timely follow-up after abnormal mammograms,12-15 even
among the insured.16 The persistent racial disparity in follow-up after abnormal mammograms has contributed to disparities in breast cancer mortality between Black and White women.17,18 Previous studies suggest that Black women
have 1.39-fold odds of a 2-month delay in breast cancer diagnosis after an abnormal mammogram and up to a 2.24-fold
delay in diagnosis and treatment combined.13 Delays in diagnosis result in an increased risk of an advanced stage of
breast cancer.14 In addition to race, barriers to timely follow-up after an abnormal mammogram include low income,
Corresponding Author: Naomi Greene, MPH, Department of Health, Behavior, and Society, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 624 N. Broadway,
Baltimore, MD 21205 (ngreene9@jhmi.edu).
1
Department of Health, Behavior, and Society, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; 2
Department of Epidemiology, Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; 3
ZAMI NOBLA: National Organization of Black Lesbians on Aging, Atlanta, Georgia; 4
Department of
Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, New York, New York; 5
Department of Social Medicine, University of North Carolina Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina
Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.33219, Received: June 11, 2020; Accepted: August 13, 2020, Published online September 29, 2020 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)
Black Sexual Minority Women Cancer Care/Greene et al
Cancer January 1, 2021 75
perceived discrimination, and lack of insurance,19,20 factors also common among SMW.8-11 However, there is a
dearth of research on how having multiple marginalized
identities (ie, Black SMW) affects breast cancer screening
and follow-up.21
Black SMW who face intersecting issues of racism
and homophobia may be less trusting of the health care
system.22 This intersection creates a unique context for
breast cancer screening and follow-up23; however, there
are limited data to inform effective interventions for
Black SMW.21 For example, when attempting to compare
mammogram use between Black and White SMW using
data from the 2015 National Health Interview Survey
and Cancer Supplement, the sample of racial and sexual
minorities was too small for statistical comparison. The
limitations of existing data highlight the need for a purposive sample of Black SMW.
Only 2 peer-reviewed articles have specifically
examined breast cancer screening and care in Black
SMW.2,23 Matthews and colleagues found that breast
cancer risk factors, including obesity, physical inactivity, tobacco use, and alcohol use, were prevalent among
Black SMW, yet perceptions of cancer risk were low.2
This mismatch between risk factors and risk perception was associated with delays in care and low rates of
prior screening mammograms.2
 Matthews et al concede
that their exploratory study was limited by recruiting
participants from a single urban location and the lack
of a comparator sample. Washington and Murray describe an intervention designed to improve breast cancer screening among Black SMW but do not address
engagement in care beyond screening or provide data
on the intervention’s efficacy.23 Both Matthews et al
and Washington and Murray highlight the need for
breast cancer care providers to be more sensitive to
Black SMW; yet neither address specific barriers or facilitators to care-seeking after an abnormal screening.
Importantly, neither study used qualitative methods to
assess how to address barriers to follow-up care in ways
that meet the expressed needs of Black SMW.
To address these gaps, we conducted a qualitative
study assessing Black SMW’s care experiences after an
abnormal mammogram or breast cancer diagnosis. Our
study was guided by Ryan and Deci’s self-determination
theory (SDT), a theory of human motivation that has
been applied to many domains, including health.24,25
SDT focuses on how social and cultural factors facilitate or undermine people’s sense of volition and initiative. Social and structural conditions that support
3 basic human needs, ie, autonomy, competence, and
relatedness, are theorized to foster the highest forms
of motivation and engagement in action (Fig. 1).26,27
Autonomy is the feeling that one is in control of what
happens to them.25 Competence is one’s belief that one
can achieve a particular outcome.25 Finally, relatedness
is the sense of connection one feels with other people.25
Support and subsequent satisfaction of these basic
needs have been shown in other health studies to motivate the initiation and long-term maintenance of health
behaviors.28 We used these SDT constructs to explore
the types of health care interactions Black SMW have
in breast cancer screening and follow-up care and to
understand the barriers and facilitators women face in
the health care system.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Sample
In partnership with ZAMI National Organization of
Black Lesbians on Aging (NOBLA), a nonprofit organization serving Black SMW, we recruited a purposive
sample of Black SMW through social media, grassroots
organizations, Black churches, and referrals from participants. Participants had to meet the following inclusion criteria: 1) aged ≥35 years, 2) assigned female at
birth, 3) self-identify as a sexual minority (gay, lesbian,
bisexual, or same-gender loving), 4) identify as Black or
African American, and 5) have a history of breast cancer
or an abnormal result on their most recent mammogram.
Individuals were excluded if they were unable to provide
consent in English.
Informed Consent
The study was approved by the Johns Hopkins University
Institutional Review Board. Study staff provided either
emailed or postal-mailed copies of the consent form to
individuals who screened eligible and expressed interest in
participating. The interviewer re-screened the participant
and conducted oral informed consent procedures before
initiating data collection. No participant identifiers were
requested or provided during data collection.
Data Collection
In consultation with the leadership of ZAMI NOBLA,
study investigators developed the semistructured interview guide (see Supporting Materials). The interview
guide focused on 3 major domains: intersecting identities, general health, and breast health. Participants were
asked about facilitators and barriers to quality breast
cancer screening, treatment, and follow-up care. In
the domain of intersecting identities, participants were 
Original Article
76 Cancer January 1, 2021
asked questions such as, “What has been challenging
about your identities? How do you manage the challenges?” In the domain of general health, participants
were asked questions such as, “How would you describe
the availability and quality of services to meet your
health needs?” In the domain of breast health, participants were asked questions such as, “What, if anything,
made it hard for you to get screening? What things
made it easy?”
One of the authors (M.A.A.) interviewed 15 participants between September 2017 and July 2018 in person
or virtually using Zoom, a Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA)-compliant
video teleconferencing system. Interviews lasted from 60
to 90 minutes, were audio recorded, and audio files were
transcribed by a professional transcription service.
Data Analysis
Transcribed interviews were managed using the qualitative research software ATLAS.ti version 8 (Scientific
Software Development GmbH). We developed a preliminary codebook using a priori codes that included topics
from each domain in the interview guide as well as constructs from SDT (described above). J.M. coded the first
7 interviews, and N.G. coded the following 8 interviews
after reviewing the coding scheme used by J.M. to ensure
consistent application of codes. The 2 analysts discussed
and resolved any differences in coding schemes throughout the coding process. Analysis included both vertical
and horizontal comparisons (ie, both within and across
interviews) to identify recurrent and emergent themes
with a focus on constructs of SDT.
Reflexivity
The authors are a diverse group of Black cisgender women,
3 of whom identify as sexual minorities (ie, queer, lesbian,
bisexual) and 2 who identify as heterosexual. Four authors
are academics, with 1 being an academic and a clinician.
One author is a social worker and community organizer.
Figure 1. Self-determination theory is illustrated. Adapted from the Center for Community Health & Prevention, University of
Rochester Medical Center.27
ŽŵƉĞƚĞŶĐĞ
dŚĞďĞůŝĞĨƚŚĂƚŽŶĞĐĂŶ
ĂĐŚŝĞǀĞĂƉĂƌƟĐƵůĂƌ
ŽƵƚĐŽŵĞ
ƵƚŽŶŽŵǇ
dŚĞĨĞĞůŝŶŐŽĨďĞŝŶŐƚŚĞ
ŽƌŝŐŝŶŽĨŽŶĞ͛ƐŽǁŶ
ďĞŚĂǀŝŽƌ
ZĞůĂƚĞĚŶĞƐƐ
dŚĞŶĞĞĚƚŽĨĞĞů
ĐŽŶŶĞĐƚĞĚĂŶĚ
ďĞůŽŶŐŝŶŐŶĞƐƐǁŝƚŚ
ŽƚŚĞƌƐ
DŽƟǀĂƟŽŶ
TABLE 1. Characteristics of Black Sexual Minority
Interviewees, N = 15
No. of
Interviewees (%)
Age: Mean [range], y 50.2 [38-64]
Sexual identity
Lesbian 12 (80.0)
Gay 2 (13.3)
Bisexual 1 (6.7)
Education
High school 3 (20.0)
Some college 4 (26.7)
College graduate/advanced degree 8 (53.3)
Employment status
Employed 13 (86.7)
Unemployed/retired 2 (13.3)
Relationship status
Single 8 (53.3)
Married or partnered 7 (46.7)
Breast cancer diagnosis
Yes 13 (86.7)
No, abnormal mammogram only 2 (13.3)
Black Sexual Minority Women Cancer Care/Greene et al
Cancer January 1, 2021 77
RESULTS
Participant Characteristics
Patient characteristics are outlined in Table 1.
Themes
Each construct from SDT was salient across the interviews:
autonomy, competence, and relatedness (Tables 2, 3,
and 4). The theme of alienation also arose for participants who described environments that failed to support
autonomy, competence, and relatedness—usually environments in which they were not treated fairly.
Autonomy
Participants described positive interactions with health
care providers as times when providers listened to and
respected her choices regarding breast cancer treatment
and care. Positive interactions with providers were
described as dyadic conversations between the participant and the health care provider. Participants who had
positive interactions with providers may have had better
outcomes. For example, 1 participant describes medication adherence despite not liking the medication because
she feels like she is in control of her treatment (Table 2,
quote 6).
Participants described negative interactions as times
when providers failed to listen to or respect her views regarding treatment and care. In some cases, providers failed
to explain treatment options or other information to the
participant. Many participants believed that their race,
gender, or sexuality played a significant role in providers
TABLE 2. Representative Quotes Demonstrating the Autonomy Construct
1 With almost any doctor, you’re going to come in and you’re going to be patient number 12345. They are challenged with seeing 50 of you every
day.… I just accept the fact that I’ve got to be my own advocate. I’ve got to do my own research and I’ve got to have a network or resources
to be able to ask other people questions. (Participant 1, age 53 y lesbian, employed, college graduate, partnered)
2 Interviewer: Do you think education or class or anything had to do with how you were perceived and how they [health care providers] engaged
with you?
Participant: That’s a good question because I think people do. People who are in authority, especially doctors who sometimes think they’re
God, I think they do adjust and, for lack of a better term, fall back when they realize like, okay, this person has a brain. (Participant 3, age 53 y,
lesbian, employed, college graduate, single)
3 Yeah, I go to the doctor more now but I trust my instincts in me and my body and then I listen to the doctor also. But I hate to say, doctors
don’t really know or feel what’s going on in you.… When I was going through chemo, they gave me… steroids. I took the pill like they told
me to. I couldn’t sleep. I couldn’t eat. I was pissed. I was mad. I told that doctor, “Don’t you ever give me that pill again and if you do, I’m not
going to take it.” …I never did and she gave me some other one. (Participant 5, age 64 y, gay, employed, some college, single)
4 This is my third bout with breast cancer, and the first and second time, it [chemotherapy] did not give me a good chance. I was like [to the
doctor], “I was really sick. I almost died. Here I sit before you a third time. So this time, I’m going to choose for myself. I will do radiation, but I
will not do chemotherapy.” …I think that health care providers should accept whatever treatment option you choose and I think they think that
Black women, especially Black women, because they think we’re dumb already, you know, that we don’t know. And so if you go in there like
you do know, they don’t have any choice but to respect it. (Participant 6, age 39 y, lesbian, employed, college graduate, married)
5 I’m glad I advocated for myself. I’m glad that I had the ability that I can tell my doctors, “No, I’m not doing that,” that we can have conversations, that I have good relationships with my doctor. I’m glad that I did the research to see what type of cancer that I have. So I didn’t allow
them to just say. “Oh, well we’re going to give you chemo whether you like it or not.” (Participant 11, age 56 y, lesbian, employed, some
college, single)
6 I did what the doctors, for the most part, wanted in terms of the surgery, doing the tamoxifen and all of that. I knew that it was ultimately my
decision, but I went with their recommendation. The tamoxifen, like this 10-year thing, I’m not crazy about it. I’m doing it because it’s recommended. I know I could stop if I wanted to just because it’s my choice, but I still feel like it’s primarily my decision to keep taking this, even
though I’m not crazy about it. Yeah, I think overall it’s my decision. (Participant 12, age 41 y, lesbian, employed, college graduate, single)
TABLE 3. Representative Quotes Demonstrating the Competence Construct
1 I was sort of looking for what are the best facilities for treating cancer… and what I found was that the best facility that was fairly close. And I
really liked my experience there. (Participant 12, age 41 y, lesbian, employed, college graduate, single)
2 I think that I got the best available doctors because I was able to go out and do my own research. A lot of women don’t do it. They just take what
they’re given.… I ask a lot of questions, and then the majority of the time they [doctors] say. “Well, you ask a lot of question [s].” Yes, because
I’m very concerned and I want to know what this means, and I want to know what that means, and I want to know what’s the timeline for this,
or are you just telling me stuff to be telling me, or is this really going to happen, or how is this going to turn out for me, and how is this going to
make me feel, and what is that going to do for me? (Participant 14, age 59 y, lesbian, some college, retired, single)
3 My mom had to take her chemo treatments in the hospital, and doctors would come in and they had great bedside manner, but they don’t want
to tell you anything. With my mom, we didn’t have options. We took what they gave us. I think that prepared me for when I did have to fight that
on my own journey. I built my team of my cancer doctors. I vetted people and I knew if I didn’t like someone, or 1 of my doctors recommended
someone and I didn’t find good reviews on them, or I didn’t feel comfortable with them, then I turned them down. (Participant 1, age 53 y
lesbian, employed, college graduate, partnered)
4 The doctor—White doctor—he’s just checking and feeling, and he’s saying, “Oh, you’re kind of young. I’m sure it’s not a malignant lump.” I had
no idea what he was talking about, so I’m just listening, and he’s talking over me to the nurse like I’m not even there. So I’m just laying there,
and I’m really scared, and so he gives me an order to go see another doctor. I don’t have another doctor so he’s like, “Just call this doctor for
follow-up,” and I’m like, “I don’t know where this doctor is. I don’t know where I’m going.” (Participant 6, age 39 y, lesbian, employed, college
graduate, married)
Original Article
78 Cancer January 1, 2021
not respecting their choices surrounding treatment and
care. Some participants were able to exercise agency to
get the care they needed, although doing so required
additional effort.
This is my third bout with breast cancer, and the
first and second time, it [chemotherapy] did not
give me a good chance. I was like [to the doctor], “I
was really sick. I almost died. Here I sit before you
a third time. So this time, I’m going to choose for
myself. I will do radiation, but I will not do chemotherapy.…” I think that health care providers should
accept whatever treatment option you choose, and I
think they think that Black women, especially Black
women, because they think we’re dumb already, you
know, that we don’t know. And so, if you go in there
like you do know, they don’t have any choice but to
respect it.
A supportive environment for autonomy was often
described by participants who were able to have open
conversations with their health care providers about
screening, treatment, and care.
Competence
Participants who described more positive experiences
with health care providers not only were able to exercise
autonomy but also had the self-efficacy to ask for and find
the type of care that fit their needs (Table 3, quote 1).
By contrast, some participants described feeling lost
and unable to find the necessary information they needed
within the health care system and providers who failed to
help them. In recalling her initial screening, 1 participant
described:
So I’m just laying there, and I’m really scared, and so he
[the doctor] gives me an order to go see another doctor.
I don’t have another doctor, so he’s like, “Just call this
doctor for follow-up” and I’m like, “I don’t know where
this doctor is. I don’t know where I’m going.”
Again, many participants believed that their race, gender, and sexuality may have played a role when health care
providers or administrative staff were unhelpful in connecting them to the services and care they needed (Table 3,
quote 4; Table 4, quotes 8-9).
Relatedness
Participants described positive interactions with health
care providers who shared at least 1 characteristic
(eg, race, gender, sexuality) with the provider. Although
some participants sought health care providers who were
Black women, many participants choose providers based
on recommendations or who were in their network. It
seemed rare for participants to have providers who identified as sexual minorities. When some congruence existed
between the participant and her provider, participants
more often described providers as treating them like
human beings, understanding and being aware of their
needs, and being accepting of all the participant’s intersectional identities (Table 4, quote 2).
Generally, feelings of relatedness appeared to facilitate an environment in which participants could ask
for what they needed and felt that they were in control of their experience. However, there were exceptions. One participant described a scenario with a Black
female primary care physician who made erroneous
assumptions about her religious beliefs on the basis
of her race, which the participant did not appreciate
(Table 4, quote 3).
Alienation
Participants described feelings of alienation when health
care providers failed to create environments that supported autonomy, competence, and relatedness. Feelings
of alienation led some to not seek care with a provider
again, as 1 participant describes below:
I went to see a reconstruction doctor, and the way
that he talked to me was the main decision that I
decided that I wasn’t going to have reconstruction. I
don’t even think he spent 10 or 15 minutes talking
to me about it. He just vaguely described what happened and all of this stuff and then looked at my
breast, and then he said something to the effect,
“That was my decision,” or whatever. I felt like it
was just him getting his money. It wasn’t any real
concern of his. So I didn’t feel comfortable at all.
I remember that day when I walked out that I was
like, “This is some mess right here. I’m not even
comfortable with this.”
In some cases, participants described health care environments that did not provide them the same access to
supportive services as other patients and their families. One
participant described issues she faced trying to access a
partner support group for her partner (Table 4, quote 11)
DISCUSSION
These findings suggest that Black SMW face challenges
in the health care system for breast cancer screening and
follow-up care because health care environments and
health care providers may be less likely to support them.
Some participants described positive interactions with 
Black Sexual Minority Women Cancer Care/Greene et al
Cancer January 1, 2021 79
providers who listened to and respected their choices
regarding treatment and care, recognized and attended
to their specific needs, and empathized and cared for
them. In these interactions, autonomy, competence,
and relatedness were supported. By contrast, other participants who described negative experiences recalled
providers making assumptions about them, neglecting
to listen to their concerns, and failing to create supportive and welcoming environments. In these circumstances, autonomy, competence, and relatedness were
not supported, and participants described feelings of
alienation. The refusal to relate to Black sexual minority
female patients further alienated those who may already
have a difficult time navigating the health care system.
TABLE 4. Representative Quotes Demonstrating the Relatedness Construct
1 My nurse, my infusion nurse, was amazing. She wasn’t LGBT, but she was very supportive of S [participant’s partner] and, when S wasn’t there,
she’s, like, “Where’s S? I need S here,” and “You’re not doing what I’m telling you to do. I’m going to tell S.” <laughs> “Don’t let me call S.”
<laughs>… It means the world. You know, because I can only imagine going through this and then, you know, having to hide who you are at
the same time. I couldn’t do it. (Participant 1, age 53 y lesbian, employed, college graduate, partnered)
2 It just so happens that the majority of my doctors are minority women. My radiologist, my breast specialist, my oncologist, my primary are… all
women, and they’re all minorities. They treated me fairly. They asked about my partner.… I mean, it [sexual orientation] was just like that was
just another piece of information about me that they knew. It didn’t make a difference 1 way or the other. (Participant 2, age 49 y, lesbian, high
school, employed, partnered)
3 I had a doctor 1 time… she was a primary care physician… black female, and this had nothing to do with sexuality, but who prayed with me. I
was a little thrown because I got a church for that. I didn’t come here for that. I’m not sure how I felt about it. But I know I didn’t appreciate it. I
was experiencing some anxiety, and she went on to tell me, “Oh, we don’t”—you know, we, as in Black people—”We don’t need this [therapy],
because we believe in God and we pray.” (Participant 3, age 53 y, lesbian, employed, college graduate, single)
4 Very good relationship because I did tell him I was gay, and he was a drag queen, so, he was like “I got you girl.” That’s what he said, you know,
“You’re my girl.” He’d say, “You know you’re my girl.” (Participant 8, age 48 y, lesbian, high school, employed, single)
5 Initially I was sort of, like, hesitant about having the male doctor as my radiation guy… because I’m a big old dyke at that point. I’m like, I don’t
want a dude in my stuff… But, you know, I said finally, you know, they say he’s good… [He] was a Black Caribbean man. Even though he
wasn’t a woman, I felt comfortable with him… I’m not sure I would have felt as comfortable if it had been a White guy. (Participant 10, age 41,
bisexual, college graduate, self-employed, partnered)
6 I think my race and gender played a role in why I chose the surgical team and facility that I chose. If I’m going to have to have surgery, I want it
to be with people who are accustomed to dealing with Black patients—because I feel like that will hopefully make it less likely that their stereotypes and biases will color the health care encounters… that I have with them. (Participant 12, age 41 y, lesbian, college graduate, employed,
single)
7 If [the health care providers] present to me that they are concerned and care about the type of care that you get, I’m open to whatever color
because I’ve had some wonderful experiences with White doctors and Indian doctors.… (Participant 14, age 59 y, lesbian, some college,
retired, single)
8 The day of the mammogram, I met with a woman—oh my gosh, she was so nice. She was a Black woman, and she was a patient financial
representative.… She was amazing, and she actually went above and beyond her job. And she was almost like a mother figure, in that she was
like, “You’ve got to get this taken care of.” You know, she hugged me, and she said, “You got this.” She was just talking to me, you know, like a
person. I’d never seen a patient advocate… that treated me like a person.… The first time was a White woman, and she was very condescending. “So you don’t have it? Do you have a second insurance?” I felt embarrassed. (Participant 15, age 38 y, lesbian, some college, employed,
partnered)
9 None of the health care providers, aside from my primary, when I do force her to do so, sit down and talk to me in layman terms, where I can
understand. I suppose they talk over me because I’m a Black woman walking in there. After you get the ultrasound, they take you in a room
and they talk to you. And he was like, “I see this in a lot of Black women,” you know? “A lot of Black women don’t come here and access
care.” And how dare you? I’m not talking about Black women. I’m talking about me. I’m walking in—talk to me like I’m an individual, having
this experience. I understand that your experience, as a health care provider and a White man as a health care provider, who is older, I understand that your experience is that Black women don’t come in here and get care until it’s too late. I don’t want to hear that. Already, I feel like I
don’t have a team around me. (Participant 15, age 38 y, lesbian, some college, employed, partnered)
10 I remember seeing this doctor once that was just not a nice guy. I got his name from an LGBT organization and he was supposedly an ally, but
he just had a horrible bedside manner, he was very rough, didn’t talk to me and tell me what was about to happen. I remember leaving his
office that day feeling violated. So I never went back, but I just found another doctor because it was still important (Participant 1, age 53 y,
lesbian, college graduate, employed, partnered)
11 I used to ask T to go with me, so I’m sure they knew I was a lesbian. I even asked for a support group for T. “We don’t have that. We have
support group for husbands.” But she’s not a husband. “We don’t have that.” (Participant 6, age 39 y, lesbian, college graduate, employed,
partnered)
12 I went to see a reconstruction doctor, and then, when I went to see him, his attitude and the way that he talked to me was the main decision
that I decided that I wasn’t going to have reconstruction.… I don’t even think he spent 10 or 15 minutes talking to me about it.… I felt like it
was just him getting his money. It wasn’t any real concern of his. So I didn’t feel comfortable at all. (Participant 14, age 59 y, lesbian, some
college, retired, single)
13 When we got there—I didn’t know what to expect. We were told just to go to the breast cancer center. There were a lot of women in there,
and they just packed them in there.… We were all cattle, sitting in that 1 little room, waiting to be called, you know? I think that as soon as a
woman comes in there, I think that there should be some kind of conversation about what to expect.… The result of what happens here could
be like something life-changing for us. I think having someone there with you that has gone through this very same thing, that might volunteer
to sit with you and not talk, or talk, hold your hand, or help you put this robe on, or, you know, be there with you from start to finish—I had
to muster up all of my courage to even go to this appointment. I almost—I rescheduled it twice. And I can imagine some people not even
rescheduling, just saying, “F it, I’m not going to go,” because they’re scared, you know? (Participant 15, age 38 y, lesbian, some college,
employed, partnered)
Original Article
80 Cancer January 1, 2021
Mistrust of health care providers already keeps many
SMW from obtaining breast cancer screening.11 Our
findings confirm that these issues are compounded for
Black SMW across the breast cancer care continuum,
from initial screening through treatment and survivorship. Thus breast cancer care should be offered in the
context of a trusting health care environment and relationship that maximizes Black SMW’s autonomy, competence, and relatedness.
Several recommendations follow from these data
(Table 5). Black SMW in this study felt they received better care from health care providers with whom they shared
1 or more identities. They were more likely to trust health
care advice and engaged in recommended care when there
was racial or gender congruence with health care providers. Therefore, diversifying the health care workforce
across the breast cancer care continuum can increase opportunities for relatedness and improve health care interactions for Black SMW. However, even in contexts when
providers were not identifying as either Black or sexual
minority, providers who were open about their identities
facilitated relatedness.
All health care providers, regardless of race, gender,
or sexuality, need more training in providing culturally
humble and empathetic care to diverse patients. Although
several participants expressed agency in being able to respond to discrimination, this is an added burden to their
access to care, and thus providers should address implicit
biases when delivering care to Black SMW. Our findings suggest that dyadic conversations that used a shared
clinical decision-making approach and gave patients the
opportunity to share their preferences and experiences
boosted feelings of autonomy and made patients more
comfortable. Previous quantitative studies have shown
that racial and ethnic minority cancer survivors lack access to physicians who understand their unique cultural
backgrounds.29 Respecting patients’ autonomy, seeking
to relate across differences to find common ground, and
providing space for patients to exercise competence are
core skills that those who work in the health care profession should cultivate. Training in shared decision making
should be provided and modeled for all health care providers across the breast cancer care continuum. Finally,
providing support to help patients navigate an overwhelming health care system could support competence
and autonomy.
Providing culturally inclusive health care environments and care can increase autonomy, competence, and
relatedness while reducing alienation and increasing the
likelihood of Black SMW being retained in breast cancer
care. Although our analysis is focused on providers, we
acknowledge that institutions, including administrative
staff, can also better embrace the needs of Black SMW.
This might include having structures and resources in
place that directly speak to their needs and the needs of
their caregivers or same-sex partners (eg, support groups
for same-sex partners). This could also include trainings
for multiple members of the oncology care team on how
to best meet the needs of Black SMW. Our research illuminates the needs of Black SMW, who have received little
attention in the area of breast cancer care. However, because we used a small, purposive sample, results may not
be applicable to all Black SMW or other groups. Many
women in our sample were college educated, and some
had the ability to do their own research and choose their
own doctors. The limited range of socioeconomic statuses
across participants prevented us from being able to identify any potential differences in experiences by socioeconomic position. Despite having the means to eventually
find the care they needed, many women in the sample
had negative experiences that they attributed to their race
and/or sexuality.
The experiences of Black SMW during breast cancer screening and follow-up care captured in this study
speak to a larger need to address individual and structural-level biases that hinder quality care for Black SMW.
Better collection of sexual orientation and racial identity
data in electronic medical records and other databases is
essential for building the evidence base to understand disparities for those at the intersection of marginalized racial and sexual identities. Integration of antiracism and
antihomophobia training into professional training programs for health care providers and continuing education
for practicing providers should be implemented. Pipeline
programs to ensure diversity within the health care workforce can ensure that all those in care have access to providers who relate to their cultural needs. These broad
TABLE 5. Recommendations to Improve Breast
Cancer Screening and Follow-Up Care Among
Black Sexual Minority Women
Recommendation 1 Diversify the health care workforce across
the breast cancer care continuum, including
health care providers and administrative staff,
to increase opportunities for relatedness for
patients.
Recommendation 2 Provide training in and model shared decision
making for all health care providers across
the breast cancer care continuum to increase
autonomy among patients.
Recommendation 3 Redesign health care environments and
resources to be inclusive of patients from all
backgrounds, including support groups.
Black Sexual Minority Women Cancer Care/Greene et al
Cancer January 1, 2021 81
structural changes may improve health care not only for
Black SMW, but for all patients.
FUNDING SUPPORT
This project was supported with institutional funds from the Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health. Tonia Poteat’s efforts were supported by
the Johns Hopkins Clinical Research Scholars Program (grant KL2TR001077).
Lorraine T. Dean’s efforts were supported by grants from the National
Cancer Institute (K01CA184288) and the Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
(P30CA006973). Naomi Greene was supported by a Cancer Epidemiology,
Prevention, and Control Training Grant from the National Cancer Institute of
the National Institutes of Health (TA CA009314).
CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors substantially contributed to the study and the article. Naomi
Greene analyzed the data, coded the qualitative interviews, and drafted
the article. Jowanna Malone coded the qualitative interviews. Mary Anne
Adams recruited and interviewed participants and contributed to the writing
of the article. Lorraine T. Dean and Tonia Poteat conceptualized the overall
research project under which the data were collected, including developing
the research guide, strategizing participant recruitment, overseeing data collection and analysis, writing elements of the article, and editing the article.
REFERENCES
1. American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts & Figures 2019. American
Cancer Society; 2019. Accessed June 9, 2020. https://www.cancer.
org/content/dam/cancer-org/research/cancer-facts-and-statistics/annua
l-cancer-facts-and-figures/2019/cancer-facts-and-figures-2019.pdf
2. Matthews AK, Li CC, Ross N, Ram J, Ramsey R, Aranda F. Breast and
cervical cancer screening behaviors of African American sexual minority
women. J Gen Pract. 2013;1:2. doi:10.4172/2329-9126.1000107
3. McElroy JA, Wintemberg JJ, Williams A. Comparison of lesbian
and bisexual women to heterosexual women’s screening prevalence
for breast, cervical, and colorectal cancer in Missouri. LGBT Health.
2015;2:188-192. doi:10.1089/lgbt.2014.0119
4. Meads C, Moore D. Breast cancer in lesbians and bisexual women:
systematic review of incidence, prevalence and risk studies. BMC Public
Health. 2013;13:1127. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-13-1127
5. Newman LA. Breast cancer disparities: high-risk breast cancer
and African ancestry. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2014;23:579-592.
doi:10.1016/j.soc.2014.03.014
6. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender Health Issues and Research Gaps and Opportunities. The
Health of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender People: Building
a Foundation for Better Understanding. National Academies Press;
2011. doi:10.17226/13128
7. Cochran SD, Mays VM, Bowen D, et al. Cancer-related risk indicators and preventive screening behaviors among lesbians and bisexual women. Am J Public Health. 2001;91:591-597. doi:10.2105/
AJPH.91.4.591
8. Lacombe-Duncan A, Logie CH. Correlates of clinical breast examination among lesbian, gay, bisexual, and queer women. Can J Public Heal.
2016;107(4-5):e467-e472. doi:10.17269/CJPH.107.5351
9. Clark MA, Bonacore L, Wright SJ, Armstrong G, Rakowski W. The
Cancer Screening Project for Women: experiences of women who partner with women and women who partner with men. Women Health.
2003;38:19-33. doi:10.1300/J013v38n02_02
10. Brown JP, Tracy JK. Lesbians and cancer: an overlooked health disparity. Cancer Causes Control. 2008;19:1009-1020. doi:10.1007/s1055
2-008-9176-z
11. Hart SL, Bowen DJ. Sexual orientation and intentions to obtain
breast cancer screening. J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2009;18:177-185.
doi:10.1089/jwh.2007.0447
12. McCarthy AM, Kim JJ, Beaber EF, et al. Follow-up of abnormal breast
and colorectal cancer screening by race/ethnicity. Am J Prev Med.
2016;51:507-512. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2016.03.017
13. Gorin SS, Heck JE, Cheng B, Smith SJ. Delays in breast cancer diagnosis and treatment by racial/ethnic group. Arch Intern Med.
2006;166:2244-2252. doi:10.1001/archinte.166.20.2244
14. Warner ET, Tamimi RM, Hughes ME, et al. Time to diagnosis
and breast cancer stage by race/ethnicity. Breast Cancer Res Treat.
2012;136:813-821. doi:10.1007/s10549-012-2304-1
15. American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts & Figures for African Americans
2016-2018. American Cancer Society; 2016. Accessed June 9, 2020.
https://www.cancer.org/content/dam/cancer-org/research/cancer-facts
-and-statistics/cancer-facts-and-figures-for-african-americans/cance
r-facts-and-figures-for-african-americans-2016-2018.pdf
16. Selove R, Kilbourne B, Fadden MK, et al. Time from screening mammography to biopsy and from biopsy to breast cancer treatment among
Black and White, women Medicare beneficiaries not participating in a
health maintenance organization. Womens Health Issues. 2016;26:642-
647. doi:10.1016/j.whi.2016.09.003
17. Richardson LC, Henley SJ, Miller JW, Massetti G, Thomas CC.
Patterns and trends in age-specific Black-White differences in breast
cancer incidence and mortality—United States, 1999-2014. MMRW
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65:1093-1098. doi:10.15585/mmwr.
mm6540a1
18. Jones BA, Dailey A, Calvocoressi L, et al. Inadequate follow-up of abnormal screening mammograms: findings from the race differences in
screening mammography process study (United States). Cancer Causes
Control. 2005;16:809-821. doi:10.1007/s10552-005-2905-7
19. Perez-Stable EJ, Afable-Munsuz A, Kaplan CP, et al. Factors influencing time to diagnosis after abnormal mammography in diverse
women. J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2013;22:159-166. doi:10.1089/
jwh.2012.3646
20. Wujcik D, Fair AM. Barriers to diagnostic resolution after abnormal
mammography. Cancer Nurs. 2008;31:E16-E30. doi:10.1097/01.
ncc.0000305764.96732.45
21. Malone J, Snguon S, Dean LT, Adams MA, Poteat T. Breast cancer
screening and care among Black sexual minority women: a scoping
review of the literature from 1990 to 2017. J Womens Health (Larchmt).
2019;28:1650-1660. doi:10.1089/jwh.2018.7127
22. Seelman KL, Adams MA, Poteat T. Interventions for healthy aging
among mature Black lesbians: recommendations gathered through
community-based research. J Women Aging. 2017;29:530-542.
doi:10.1080/08952841.2016.1256733
23. Washington TA, Murray JP. Breast cancer prevention strategies for
aged Black lesbian women. J Gay Lesbian Soc Serv. 2005;18:89-96.
doi:10.1300/J041v18n01
24. Deci EL, Ryan RM. The “what” and “why” of goal pursuits: human
needs and the self-determination of behavior. Psychol Inquiry.
2000;11:227-268.
25. Ryan RM, Deci EL. Self-determination theory and the facilitation of
instrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. Am Psychol.
2000;55:68-78. doi:10.1002/jsfa.2740050407
26. Patrick H, Williams GC. Self-determination theory: its application to
health behavior and complementarity to motivational interviewing. Int
J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2012;9:18. doi:10.1186/1479-5868-9-18
27. Center for Community Health & Prevention, University of Rochester
Medical Center Rochester NY. Self-Determination Theory. Accessed
April 14, 2020 https://www.urmc.rochester.edu/community-health/
patient-care/self-determination-theory.aspx
28. Ng JYY, Ntoumanis N, Thogersen-Ntoumani C, et al. Selfdetermination theory applied to health contexts: a meta-analysis.
Perspect Psychol Sci. 2012;7:325-340. doi:10.1177/1745691612
447309
29. Butler SS, Winkfield KM, Ahn C, et al. Racial disparities in patient-reported measures of physician cultural competency among cancer survivors in the United States. JAMA Oncol. 2020;6:152-154.